---
title: Mum, Dad, and Fictions about a Faraway Land
date: 2025-05-30 10:55:00 +0000
categories: [Blogging, Writing]
tags: [china]
toc: true
pin: true
Typora-root-url: ../../pkun7987.github.io
---

# Part 1

Just to be clear, both are still alive—provided Dad’s not drunk enough to have fallen asleep on the street somewhere and frozen, and Mum’s not getting a heart attack from it, which has happened before. Considering the pleasant spring all over our northern hemisphere, I guess fatality is unlikely, so all good!

Last week I saw tons of private messages from Mum, which was unusual. For context, I barely message my parents and we never call each other (which I think is for the best). The three of us do have a group chat where they share gossip about who slept with whom at work, which managers just got arrested, what crazy assets turned up when the government raided their homes, and how much money they paid to the Regime to get released, but nothing more than that (Yes, my parents work at the same place, and no, it’s not a good idea).

I skimmed through Mum’s messages, no arrests, no scandals, boring, just Dad’s office politics mess, which has escalated to the point where my parents are considering a divorce because they really can’t reconcile their positions. Also, Dad has been drinking heavily, and at the tender age of fifty-something, decided to run away from home. Dad’s whereabouts are currently unknown, but I know if Mum actually wanted to find him, she would have succeeded.

I blocked Mum and the group chat for two years previously—this included the time I was working in Mexico—during which she (as she put it) sensed through “telepathic connection” that I had returned to China at some point. She “called some friends” and located all my immigration history, flight details, and possibly other travel records, which she was kind enough not to let me know about. She used to talk about this endeavour with great enthusiasm, often in front of others, to demonstrate how much she “loved me”. Considering she hasn’t done that to Dad, I guess the love between them really is gone—and to be fair, its shelf life had already far exceeded my expectations.

The messages involved tons of documents, chat records, and voice messages that bore an odd resemblance to a messy evidence bundle from an aggressive client, but since I happened to be working on a trial-summary exercise anyway, I figured I might as well treat it as practice. It was overwhelming at first, but after weeding out Mum’s emotional rambling, the case became quite clear:

The parties are, obviously, my parents, who went to university together and have been working at the same public hospital alongside many of their classmates since graduation. Growing up, I was immersed in over 30 years of gossip involving the same rotating cast of people. The stage is the largest public hospital locally (which, in a Chinese context, means it runs like a government organisation and the doctors are treated as civil servants). 

The parties are, obviously, my parents, who went to university together and have been working at the same public hospital alongside many of their classmates since graduation. Growing up, I was immersed in over 30 years of gossip involving the same rotating cast of people. The stage is the largest public hospital locally (which, in a Chinese context, means it runs like a government organisation and the doctors are treated as civil servants). 

The dispute is that the previous head of Dad’s department had retired, and the hospital organised a “democratic” vote to select a replacement. Dad won by an overwhelming majority, but management gave the position to another senior doctor with less experience—probably because his wife holds an important position in the local government.

After that senior doctor was promoted, he started trying to isolate Dad. Another department with the same specialisation saw this opportunity and invited Dad to join them. Dad wanted to go, but a senior hospital manager—the “Party Secretary”—refused to approve the paperwork.

Please don’t ask me what a Party Secretary is, because I don’t know (and gladly so). For me, it’s like a management position every public Chinese entity has. It’s like the head of the organisation, but affiliated more with the Party than with the actual organisation. A lot of Chinese people, including me, can’t seem to fathom whether the head or the Party Secretary is supposed to be an organisation’s “number one,” and I believe this lack of understanding has cost a lot of people dearly. I’ve wisely positioned myself where I don’t have to understand that question too well (and proudly so).

In Dad’s case, the Party Secretary is refusing to approve the transfer—even though everyone of actual relevancy (i.e., the ones with titles that you understand) to the hospital’s operations has approved. Our suspicion is that instead of treating the Party Secretary as number one, Mum and Dad treated her as number three or four, and didn’t offer any bribes, which is usually expected in these situations.

Mum was furious and reported the matter to the local government. Dad disagreed with this approach, since he only wanted to quietly land in the other department like a snowflake, without creating too much of a bang.

Later, he became reluctant to leave at all, because during this drama, the department was reorganised into three sub-teams—led by the new head, Dad, and another senior doctor. Each sub-team needs at least three doctors to be operational, but the new head was unable to get enough doctors onto his team, as most doctors wanted to be on Dad’s team—he’s the best at complex operations and the only one willing to train juniors.

The new head tried to threaten the junior working most closely with Dad (let’s call him Dr. Daddy’s Boy) into switching teams, but failed. Dad didn’t want his juniors and trainees to be bullied after his departure, so, as the knight with the shining armour (or the expendable soldier with no armour) he stepped down from the sub-team leader position and backed one of his juniors to become the new leader, placing Dr. Daddy’s Boy under his wings.

As such, Dad has given away his position in his current department, but couldn’t transfer to the new one either due to the Party Secretary’s disapproval.

Confusingly, he no longer seemed that keen on leaving. He wanted to stay and make sure this new team made up of his juniors could function smoothly after his potential departure. To make that happen, he’s been sabotaging Mum’s report, making contradictory remarks in the follow-up investigations and putting her in an awkward position. It didn’t help that many of the managers in both the hospital and the relevant government departments are their old friends from university. As Mum put it, since she can’t change the fact that Dad’s her partner in crime in producing me—divorce or not—she refused to back down, because she didn’t want to “lose face”.

This really isn’t a complicated situation. Given the variables, the outcome was always going to be as straightforward as a linear function or a basic simulation. Still, I found it a decent glimpse into the lives of ordinary Chinese people spawned at specific space-time coordinates. 

This glimpse will largely focus on domestic matters. I usually avoid investing energy in them—after years of mental health struggles associated with them, I have (quite successfully) programmed myself to stay numb and ignore relevant inputs.

However, over the past few years, I’ve noticed that even simple simulations can be hard to illustrate—for human beings, even those with the same character origin story but different spawning stats, often struggle to understand each other. Since I happen to have good data for visualising a kind of life that isn’t supposed to be seen, I would like to keep this record, and hopefully one day, some AI might make sense of it all.

So I wanted to write things down—before my robotic brain carries out its scheduled data purge.

This content will probably be very boring to most. If you happened to stumble across it, feel free to read it as fiction rather than non-fiction—for real lives are no more planned than fictional ones. If our parents know each other, I guess there’s a reason we’ve stayed friends for this long, and I’d really appreciate it if you could please pretend you didn’t see this, for none of my rambling would be new to you anyway.

 I grew up in a northern Chinese city. It’s in the province surrounding Beijing, but not Beijing. A friend from Beijing once summed up my hometown as the “Sin City” of China. As you will see later, this is somewhat accurate, but a more accurate description should be the “Beijing’s masturbation cup”— credit to some random netizen. However, the discourse around the intercourse between Beijing and its neighbours, and the disposal of the capital’s bodily fluid shall not be the topic of this essay.

My hometown is not a shithole per se, but many would agree it’s shitty. If you search the city’s name on YouTube in Mandarin, every result is about a few girls getting publicly beaten up by hooligans for refusing their advances. When I last visited home, this incident was a hot topic at dinner tables, for people were excited that we “went viral”. Most were very interested in whether the girls worked at nightclubs, and if so, which one. No one seemed to care much about the actual beating. People here are very used to incidents, but not to going viral, because news can’t really get out of this town, and probing eyes can’t get in.

Visually, it used to be very grim. The economy was heavily dependent on mining and steel production. It was once one of the most polluted cities in China, with winters that reminded me of Oliver Twist. People often say that if you ranked global steel production, China would come first, my hometown would come second, and my hometown’s illegal overproduction would come third. I’m not sure if that was ever true. It certainly isn’t now, for China has spent the past decade introducing production cuts and cracking down on pollution.

There used to be a lot of rich mine and steel bosses around, on Chinese New Year Eve (Or Lunar New Year, if you so prefer, but the narratives here are about China so I will use Chinese New Year through out), some of them would hire people to set off fireworks all night. It was really a sight. Mum was always busy on those nights, for she’s an ophthalmologist, and had to remove several eyeballs each new year because of defective fireworks or reckless people. She became lifelong friends with many of her patients this way, since she really was a master tailor when it came to stitching people’s faces back together.

When she was a junior, she trained in Beijing in plastic surgery and saw some of China’s earliest gender reassignment surgeries. These days, she still occasionally performs double eyelid procedures. It’s a one-cut surgery to transform Asian monolids into double lids, mostly for high schoolers applying to performing arts colleges who (or whose parents) believe bigger eyes will give them a better shot.

I’m glad she never randomly performed this or any procedure on me, though she had plenty of chances. In fact, my first ear piercings were the work of one of her anaesthesiologist colleagues. I was under general anaesthesia for a wisdom tooth extraction. I didn’t need general anaesthesia, but Mum arranged it without telling me because she thought I couldn’t handle the pain. The anaesthesiologist noticed I didn’t have any piercings and decided, on the spot, to pierce my ears with a medical syringe. She botched the angle—I had to wait for it to heal and get it redone later.

Back to Mum’s eyeballs. Some of them belonged to the steel bosses. Others, to scrap collectors. Those big firework displays usually came in cardboard boxes packed with a dozen or so shots each. You only had to light them once—they’d fire off one by one in a preset sequence. People who couldn’t afford to enjoy the holiday would rush in to grab the leftover cardboard boxes to sell. They had to be fast, for there were always others.

As a result, when a box of fireworks started to quiet down, many would take the gamble, assuming the last shot had already gone off. Some got lucky. Others not.

Mum doesn’t have to worry about that anymore. Fireworks are now banned too, as part of the effort to curb pollution. These days, my hometown looks quite green—even touristy. Many who’ve visited have commended it for how “liveable” it is. I suppose the steel bosses would agree, if they are still around.

It has a population of more than 7 million; I guess the metropolitan area holds around 4 million. It’s a small big city that once received the title of “National Civilised City” (全国文明城市)—one of 290 across the country. The award was later rescinded after the viral beating incident. I find “civilised” harder to explain than “Party Secretary”, so I will just leave it to your interpretation. It’s an engineered concept anyway.

The vast majority of the doctors at my parents’ hospital went to the same university. I grew up around stories about how a waitress in the hospital canteen got promoted to a management role after an affair with the hospital head, or about two gangs arriving at the hospital at the same time after a fight, both brandishing knives at the doctors, trying to make sure their friend get stitched back to one piece first (that was when I was daycare age, unlikely to happen now). As someone working in the legal profession, I’m glad this dilemma does not apply to lawyers, for my townspeople might die if there are no doctors treating them, but they will do just fine without advice on the rule of law.

Mum is local to my hometown, but Dad came from a (relatively) faraway province in central China. I guess his childhood smelled of buns and noodles, but not rice, for the climate there was so arid that only wheat could grow. When he was younger, it took hours for him to walk to school, and he had to get up really early. On his daily march to school, Dad had to break through a series of checkpoints—one of the most dangerous being a house where the owner kept two guard dogs roaming free at night. Since Dad always set out before dawn, he’d run into them every time. His tactic was to throw two buns as decoys, then seize the chance to break through while the enemy was distracted.

As a result, he got pretty athletic and at one point trained to be a football player. When he got to high school and started playing in the provincial league, he realised that with the inadequate training in his small town, there was no catching up to kids who had been coached properly since childhood. I learned about this story as he tried to convince me to give up any interest in music or art—because, like him, I’d obviously missed the window early on.

He didn’t apply to the university he and Mum attended in my hometown—in fact, he probably didn’t apply to any medical programme at all. Back then, people’s lives were mostly random (I guess they still are). My parents were born in the 1970s and their education, their parents’ mental health, and in turn, their own, were all disrupted by the Cultural Revolution—a decade of chaos in China (topic of another day). Two of my grandparents died before I was born, largely due to the toll they’ve taken from this mad period. Two survived, but hardly cared about my existence. My parents would bring up how this decade of madness traumatised their parents, but don’t seem to acknowledge the impact it had on themselves, so the above is just my own reasoning.

For my parent’s generation, it was insanely hard to get into university, and it wasn’t uncommon to get assigned somewhere randomly if your national exam marks weren’t high enough. Dad’s marks weren’t particularly high, his maths were very good, but for the English paper, he answered entirely by guessing. It was multiple choice, and defying the laws of probability, he got an impressive result of 40%. I’d say if he put in a little bit of work he would have nailed the first stage of the Solicitor Qualifying Exam of England and Wales, which has a pass mark just above 50%. I remember when I was nine and had just started to have English classes at school, I had homework that required parents to quiz us on spelling basic words—apples, bananas, that kind of thing. He already couldn’t help. Lucky me.

He originally applied for military school with all his mates, and attending military school meant a secured future within the Regime. One of his mates (let’s call him Army Boy) was very well connected. He got in without sitting the national exam. It was hard to gauge people’s background at that time; even Xi was just a nondescript lad from a neighbouring village in the same poor province. 

Army Boy told Dad that his dad, Army Boy Sr., had greenlighted that if his mates wanted to attend military school with him, they only needed to ask. Army Boy didn’t know Dad’s national exam results, and when the results released, Dad indeed at one point found himself pacing back and forth outside Army Boy’s house. 

He did not knock on that door. He had always been the top dog of the pack, and Army Boy was a sidekick at most. It just hurt Dad’s ego too much to ask for favours, and he never contacted Army Boy again.

Mum’s national exam results were slightly better (I guess). She had always wanted to be a police officer. Her results were good enough to get into that Beijing-based university affiliated with the Ministry of Public Security. She passed all rounds of interviews and would have had “connections” to look after her once she got in. However, my grandma was in poor health and wanted her youngest daughter to be a doctor (her eldest was already a dentist, and second eldest a police officer, I guess that wasn’t handy enough for her). So Mum signed up for the local medical school instead.

That didn’t go as planned, for my grandma passed away the first year Mum started working.

In hindsight, military school and police school would have been the perfect match for my parents. Dad was guileless, loyal to his pack, obedient; Mum was fierce, relentless, investigative. I often felt that if Mum had applied the same tactics tracking a criminal as she did tracking me, and used the same colourful language on a suspect as she later used on me, she would have solved any cold case and sent any suspect to their knees crying for their mama.

Anyway, at medical school, Mum met Dad, who had ended up there from a thousand miles away probably by random allocation. Their first encounter was in the canteen. Dad tried rice for the first time in his life, immediately dumped the entire plate, and loudly complained about the university’s audacity to feed *kibble* to humans. He got a lot of attention. Everyone assumed he must have been filthy rich to show such disdain for rice—when in fact, he’d just never eaten it before.

At university, Dad was the head of class; Mum, the head of sports. I never quite understood how Mum landed that position. I remember her saying she’d been practising martial arts since she was very young, and that when she was in primary school, she used to beat up boys and force them to carry her home on their backs. I’m still sceptical about the truthfulness of this—I just don’t see how the boys could have been willing. I would’ve fought her to the death if she’d tried that on me.

Even at university, Dad showed great spirit for self-sacrifice. Once, he and his bros got into some kind of argument with the class next door after a few drinks, and everyone gathered for a Gangs of New York-style fight. Dad didn’t want his bros to get into trouble, and persuaded everyone to leave. Just as people thought he’d calmed things down, he quietly sneaked out of the dorm without anyone noticing and smashed the window of the other class’s dorm with a heavy brick. No one knew what to make of it, and people went to Mum, demanding an explanation. Mum told me she didn’t understand him, and I guess she probably didn’t try to. My very existence is good proof.

Sometimes I wonder if any of the people currently handling Dad’s transfer paperwork were there at the dorm that day. It’s not entirely unlikely.

I don’t consider either of my parents acceptable dating options, and they are definitely not “compatible”. Anyway, they got married and were assigned to the same hospital. They belonged to the last generation of Chinese university graduates to receive assigned jobs. Dad was supposed to get assigned back to his hometown, but some of the people in power were my maternal grandparent’s friends or students. I suppose they helped, and Dad managed to stay (My grandparents were interesting characters in their own right, especially my grandpa. He went to a very good university, graduated with a perfect GPA and was an expert in crop breeding. Like many others of his generation, he answered Chairman Mao’s call that “educated youth must go to the countryside and to receive re-education from the poor, lower and middle peasants” and worked as a secondary school biology teacher). 

Anyway, Mum and Dad got married. Soon after settling down, they produced an extraordinary creature (cue narcissistic wink).

 They had no luck finding decent nannies and no help from their own parents. When I was around four or five, my paternal grandma visited for a few weeks, taking me to parks like walking a puppy. One day, she told me she’d be leaving tomorrow. I got up the next morning, saw her, and asked, “Why are you still here?” (Based on her later overreaction, I might have said, How the hell are you still here?—but surely a five-year-old wouldn’t say that. Right?) In hindsight, my social awkwardness clearly had deep roots. I realised immediately that it wasn’t the right thing to say, but genuinely didn’t know how to fix the situation. She got offended and said, “I *am* leaving. I won’t see you anymore. I’m going to play with the kids back home.” She did leave. That was the last time I saw her, and she is, incidentally, also still alive.

As a result, raising me was a huge task. Things got worse in 2003, when SARS—the Covid before Covid-19—broke out. Doctors were drafted to work in the designated SARS quarantine hospital, and families were only allowed to visit by peeking through the bars into the hospital grounds. Normally, married doctors with kids were drafted last, but I guess Dad volunteered.

Daycares were closed during SARS, and Mum really struggled to juggle childcare with a full-time medical job. Lucky for her, I had this classmate from daycare (let’s call him Boy Kun or BK, for he’s also a Kun); his grandma heard about our situation and kindly offered to take care of me. As a result, I started spending my entire days at BK’s grandma’s place playing with BK. I didn’t enjoy it at all—BK was stronger and would bully me. He particularly enjoyed tricking me onto a seesaw. He’d start playing normally at first, then after realising he weighed more, he’d jump up and down violently, smashing me on the metal seesaw and enjoying my inability to get off.

BK’s parents were business owners. After work, they’d come to the grandma’s place for dinner. In my opinion, BK’s parents’ parenting workload was child’s play. Unlike my parents, they outsourced everything to the grandma. All they seemed to do was give him a good spanking after I cried and complained about his bullying. Mum was really sorry that I brought this upon BK, but BK seemed to be Captain China material—he could do this all day and just resume bullying me the next morning, so I guess it didn’t really trouble him.

Sometimes I thought he was stupid, but he really wasn’t. He never did it when adults were watching.

I’m still friends with BK today. He’s doing a pure math PhD in the US. Quite a nice character. At one point in my life, I really didn’t want to be his friend anymore—not after what he did to me—but then I realised BK doesn’t even remember any of our daycare classmates (except those who later went to school with him), so he probably doesn’t remember how he “played” with me either. There’s no point in holding a grudge that meant nothing to the person who caused it.

I really wish my parents had just left me alone at home. I would’ve done just fine. Even in daycare, I was already a master at Red Alert 2 and Heroes of Might and Magic III. I didn’t know how it worked, as I probably couldn’t read most of the characters on the interface, but I picked up everything by watching Dad play. I’ve always thought of Windows 98 as my special twin brother—we’re the same age, but he’s much more special. Definitely a better sibling than BK.

Luckily, I got my chance after I started primary school. Mum and Dad were now comfortable leaving me at home during school holidays. They would come back during their lunch break to prepare a hot lunch for me. I always pretended to be asleep as they left for work, then immediately jumped on the computer, and shut it down a few minutes before their return so it could cool down as if no one touched it. I wonder what they thought I was doing to entertain myself while they were gone. Barbie?

When I was eight or nine, I stumbled upon adult content online. After concluding that the human body wasn’t all that interesting, I blocked all the sites via some parental control portal so that Dad wouldn’t inadvertently come across these sites that I felt would harm his mental and physical health. When I was around eleven, I started noticing China’s Great Firewall being deployed (interestingly, it’s also a baby of 1998). I started to “jump the wall,” but didn’t find anything particularly depressing that I wasn’t already aware of. Back then, average Chinese people weren’t yet brainwashed by algorithms, and anything sensitive had already been passed down by shared memory and discussed openly. Every major topic that people assume an average Chinese wouldn’t know, everyone around me knew, and naturally so did I. I also tried to register for Facebook and got the notification that I was underage. There really weren’t a lot to see on the other side.

After much exploration, I felt gaming was still the way to go (unfortunately, this isn’t one of those stories where the main character taught themselves to code and became a hacking prodigy)—and, much to Mum’s disappointment, I naturally became the first and so far the only person in the extended family to need prescription glasses.
